---
title: Introduction
has_children: false
nav_order: 2
---

# Introduction

Accounts are individual sidechains that are validated with proof of ownership by signing transactions with an elliptical curve private key.  Those transactions are once again validated by delegates using proof of stake via bonds during block creation.  Accounts hold a balance that powers the transactional layer of the platform.  An account is removed from the network the timestamp of the last transaction that put it below the balance.

Every account is owned by another account beginning with the genesis accounts.  Genesis accounts are hardcoded into the protocol and are responsible for receiving fees, opening accounts, handling delegate creation, and other forms of redistributions to further the platform.  During the platform's infancy, a genesis account will create accounts for free until the funds are used up.  Genesis accounts are controlled by the foundation until full decentralized governance is activated.

Information is passed between accounts in the form of transactions that provide the foundation for all modules to run upon.  Transactions are signed by the sending account and are only considered valid once validated by delegates in a block.  Transactions will have an expiration time under the consensus protocol that once breached will cause the transaction to be removed from the network.  Transactions are required to have fees to be selected for inclusion in a block by an elected delegate.  Transactions are paid to the public keys of accounts.

Delegates are rewarded with the sum of all transaction fees included in the block created.  Transactions by default are sorted from highest to lowest for inclusion in a block but it is up to the delegate to decide which transactions they wish to include as long the protocol is complied with.  Delegates are free to spend rewards however they wish but they must hold a set balance to be considered active.  Delegates that produce an invalid block forfeit their bond posted for the block to the next delegate as a zero amount transaction with a fee of the bond.  If the bond forfeiture causes the delegate to go below the minimum required balance they will lose delegate status so delegates must keep enough to cover the minimum balance the bond to avoid complications.  Delegate nodes must meet performance requirements or risk losing their delegate status.

The initial term will be preconfigured to reward predefined delegates ran by the foundation.  The collected fees will then be redistributed back into the platform in a future determined manner.  Before the initial term is complete delegate selection will start that will select the preconfigured number of delegates that will create and validate blocks.  Delegates are selected by popular vote by active accounts on the network.  Only accounts that match simple criteria will be allowed to vote in a term they are eligible for.  This means that if an account meets the criteria and never changes then it will likely never lose its right to vote unless future changes are voted in by a majority during decentralized governance.  Once an account casts its vote for a delegate it will keep the same vote for every remaining election until changed.  Accounts can change their vote at any time.  The positioning is most votes to least votes for each round in a term.

Each round in a term, a delegate selects a list of transactions from the transaction memory pool, much like Bitcoin's, that it will include in the block.  There is a limitation to how many transactions can be included in a single block but still allows for thousands of transactions a second.  There are already designs in the works to allow for tens of thousands of transactions a second if that ever becomes a need of the platform.  Once the block is created it will be submitted to the other delegates for validation, if the block is considered valid by a popular vote of delegates it can be submitted to the network.  If the block is invalid then the bond is paid to the next delegate skipping the block creation round for the faulty delegate.  Delegates votes are attached to the block when submitted to the network, this allows for other accounts to validate the voting process.

The track and trace features of the platform are provided by the tracking module that uses the data inclusion capabilities of transactions to move products throughout a supply chain.  Accounts that use the module can create companies, staff, locations, products, merchandise, and handle distribution.  All of this provided in a free suite of decentralized applications that connect to the GRAMA platform and automate 3rd party reporting or integrations.  Information is publicly accessible for anyone to validate the legitimacy of a product without sacrificing the privacy of the user's internal operations.
